---
layout: post
title:  "WWDC 2019: My (late) Reaction"
date:   June 10, 2019
categories: blog
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
**Quick Note:** I have been quite busy so I have only been able to watch the main keynote and listen to half of the [AppStories](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/appstories/id1227872143?i=1000440777926) interview with Craig Federighi (which is only 48 minutes long), let alone record a [podcast](https://uluroospeaks.com/theflock/feed.xml) episode. So I wrote a blog post. I am literally writing this while guests are here, and in the same room as me (note to self: talking and typing different things is really hard).
<!--more-->

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Now that the opening keynote was aired exactly a week ago and everyone plus their dog have written about WWDC, it seems like the perfect time to analyze the keynote. After some expected analytics about iOS being adopted much faster than Android and a small tvOS update, watchOS 6 was announced. The update includes some really cool new watch faces and the App Store app for watchOS. On its own the app isn’t that interesting it allows you to discover, search for, and install apps. In most cases it is probably easier to take out your iPhone and install the app from the iOS App Store or the Watch app, but the thing that this brings to the table is the ability to have a watchOS only app. Since I do not own an Apple Watch I can’t really see how useful it is.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The next update might be too big for your pocket (I am probably more proud of that than I should be), it comes in the form of iOS 13. Now I know iPadOS is advertised as being different from iOS, they are still close enough that I will talk about both at the same time (and so I don’t have to repeat myself). One of the most anticipated features was Dark Mode. After the turn to the _light side_ with iOS 7, dark mode was highly requested. Six iOS version updates later, that wish was granted. From an implementation standpoint, I can see why it took so long include in iOS. For macOS, most apps used the standard window style, so changing the window color wasn’t difficult to implement. On the other hand, iOS apps often use many custom views, which makes implementing dark mode system wide much more difficult. SwiftUI will help to change that (more on that later). iOS 13 is a fairly large update in terms of new features that it brings to your device. In addition to dark mode, iOS 13 brings Animoji to older devices (stickers only), swipe to type, a new photos app with your best photos as the main focus, better file management in the Files app (such as zipping, and USB drive support), multi-window-like interaction on iPad, new ways to trigger Siri Shortcuts (such as when opening a specific app or on a certain date), mouse support via a new accessibility feature, and the migration of many 3D Touch shortcuts to a long press. That last one I would like to dig into a little more. I use 3D Touch every day. After seeing rumors that 3D Touch might be absent on the next iPhone release, I was in denial. Until I started seeing articles and tweets about long presses being the new 3D Touch. I knew no one really knew about or used 3D Touch so I thought Apple should focus on “advertising” it  (for a lack of a better word) or just remove it, but I did not want the convenient features that 3D Touch brought to the table to just “vanish”. Since they still exist via a long press, I am completely on board with the death of 3D Touch.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Mac Pro put Apple back in the **real** pro market. Since 2013 and the announcement of the “trashcan” Mac Pro, the Mac Pro wasn’t seen by many as a good computer for professionals who need a lot of “configureability.” Since you could upgrade almost nothing. Not with the latest Mac Pro, nearly everything can be upgraded or swapped out for a different component, so long as there are drivers available for the component, and it is compatible with the motherboard. I am not in the market for a super powerful Mac that costs as much as a decent used car, so I do not have any opinions on it. The second product (again, not in the market for) caused a lot of controversy. The Pro Display XDR (which stands for eXtreme Dynamic Range) is a “budget” monitor for professionals who need a monitor that can display almost every color under the sun. The controversy comes from the fact that the monitor is $4999 and the stand (sold separately) costs an additional $999. Let me clarify what this display is for. The Pro Display XDR is not for the average John or Jane Doe who just needs another monitor, the monitor was created for professionals who need a display with (nearly) perfect color accuracy and don’t want to spend over $35,000 on a reference monitor (that’s where “budget” comes in to play). Hopefully that clarifies why the monitor costs so much compared to the average display (because it is NOT for just watching YouTube). Just to be perfectly clear, you should not be considering this monitor if you do anything other than high end video production, professional photography, or (maybe) graphic design. The next bit of controversy is the stand, the thousand dollar stand. I do agree that this stand is a bit overkill in how expensive it is, but most of the professionals who will buy this monitor will probably buy the VESA mount instead because they will already have a spot open from the previous monitor, have a spot that the monitor needs to be (like on a rig of sorts), or the monitor needs to be able to be moved around.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The last announcement was macOS 10.15 Catalina. In the latest installment of the Mac operating system iTunes is no more. In place of the game changing application are three (four if you count the Finder) new applications. The first is Music. Music is much like it’s iOS counterpart, it allows you to play, manage, and buy music. The second app replacing iTunes is Podcasts. Podcasts, again, is like it’s iOS counter part. Podcasts is a Catalyst app (more on that later). If you put Music (a traditional AppKit app) and Podcasts next to each other, you will have trouble telling the difference between the two (UI wise, not feature wise). The third and final app replacing iTunes is the TV app. I’m not sure how it is going to work, since it’s tvOS counterpart often opens 3rd party apps to play the video. Maybe it opens the website, but that seems a bit counter productive. I’ll have to test that when the public beta is released. The feature I’m looking foreword to the most, even though I do not own an iPad, is Sidecar. I have seen 3rd party precursors to Sidecar like Luna Display or Duet Display, but Sidecar provides one important feature that the 3rd party predecessors do not have (besides being built in). Sidecar includes a TouchBar, even if your Mac is not a MacBook Pro from the last few years. Apple has always been security focused. That is no different in macOS Catalina. MacOS will now prompt you for access to private data, such as location, Bluetooth devices, and the file system. On he subject of the file system, the macOS system itself now has its own read only partition on the Mac, this means you cannot accidentally corrupt your system.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The most important announcement, in my opinion, was that of the Project Formerly Known as Marzipan. When Apple first unveiled Project Catalyst last year, I was worried to say the least. I thought that this was going to be the down fall of well designed macOS applications. After seeing Podcasts and the other apps showcased on apple.com, I’ve changed my mind. For those of you who don’t know what Catalyst is, it is kind of a “port” of UIKit for macOS (that’s not a great description, because it makes Catalyst sound bad and half-baked). Catalyst is used to help create a Mac app from already existing iPad app code. I listened to (half) an episode of [AppStories](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/appstories/id1227872143?i=1000440777926) where Federico Viticci of MacStories was talking to Craig Federighi about all of the announcements. In the half of the podcast I listened to, Federighi was explaining why the first Catalyst apps looked so “iPady,” he said that the designer decided to make it the way it was. He explains later on that the apps are 100% native. Catalyst apps will bring lots of apps to the Mac, but they will also bring more apps to the iPad, which is counter-intuitive. Craig Federighi seems to have the same idea.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So that’s pretty much everything that was announced at the opening keynote for WWDC 2019. I skipped over ARKit and SwiftUI, those don’t seem nearly as important to the average reader as the rest of the announcements.

### Sources
* [Podcasts: 114 — Craig Federighi: The AppStories Interview](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/appstories/id1227872143?i=1000440777926)
* [YouTube: WWDC 2019 Keynote — Apple](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=psL_5RIBqnY)
* [Apple: iPad Apps For Mac](https://developer.apple.com/ipad-apps-for-mac/)
